---
folderOrder: 0
title: 4.2 All content is written in simplified English for clarity and inclusivity.
displayName: Accessible English
aliases:
  - TL4.2
card_icon: /assets/img/principles/theme_inclusive.svg
---
Computing is a subject domain filled with lots of technical language and abstract ideas which can create a barrier to learning. When we create our content, we write it in English. In some contexts, we may also translate some or all of the content of a resource into a local language.

However, to make sure our content written in English is accessible to a broad global audience, we use the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR). By focusing on the language we use within our learning experiences, we aim to reduce the literacy barrier to learning.

We take an approach which we believe balances accessibility with accuracy:

- For learners, we aim to write content at level B1 (intermediate), which provides enough vocabulary to describe concepts without being overly complex.
    
- For educators, we aim for our material to be mostly B2 (upper intermediate) which allows us to describe both abstract and concrete concepts and use more specialised vocabulary.
    
- Some computing specific vocabulary belongs to higher levels C1+. We don’t avoid or simplify these terms but explain them using appropriate levels of language. For example, the term “abstraction” is a C1 word, which we might explain as:
    
- "Abstraction is a way of simplifying things. It means you only focus on the important parts of an idea or a tool and hide all the complicated details you don't need to see. For example, when you use a remote control, you don't need to know how the inside of it works, you just need to know which button to press." (B1 level)
    
- "Abstraction is the process of reducing a complex system to its essential components to make it more manageable. It involves creating a simplified representation of an underlying process or object, allowing a user or another program to interact with it without needing to understand its internal complexity." (B2 level)
    
