---
title: "Professional development for\r computing educators"
fileOrder: 30
displayName: "Professional development for\r computing educators"
aliases:
  - PD
draft:
card_icon: /assets/img/quickreads/QR30_PD_for_comp_educators.svg
sidebar: false
---

High-quality educator professional development (PD) is one of the most effective
ways to improve learner outcomes. Offering quality PD for computing educators is
therefore crucial for making sustainable improvements to computing education.
This Quick Read reflects some of our current thinking on this topic to help those
providing or undertaking PD.

> [!example] Summary
> ## Key principles
> 
> Research indicates that effective professional development is:
>  
>  **Evidence based:** Effective PD is grounded in evidence showing which approaches are most likely to have positive results for learners.
>  
>  **By experts, for experts:** PD should be designed and delivered by experienced computing education professionals for other classroom experts.
>  
>  **Focused on educator and learning outcomes:** PD should help educators change their practice in ways that benefit both learners and educators.
>  
>  **Sustained, personalised learning journeys:** Educators chose PD based on their needs and aim to develop over time, rather than expecting ‘quick fixes’.
>  
>  **Embeds learning into practice:** Research is made concrete and actionable so that educators can use it in their settings.
>  
>  **Models good learning:** PD should model effective andragogy and pedagogy.
>  
>  **Adaptable to context:** PD content is designed to be adaptable for the educators’ contexts.
>  
>  **Creates collaborative learning opportunities:** Purposeful social learning improves outcomes.

![Main image[QR30_PD_for_comp_educators.svg]]

## Why is professional development so important?

Participating in PD is a core feature of educators’ work, as effective PD is key to improving student outcomes.[^1],[^2] The goal of effective PD is changes in practice that directly benefit learners. The outcome of effective PD for educators should always be a change in practice that directly benefits students.[^1]

PD design often draws on andragogy (the practice of teaching adults). Knowles[^3] argued that adult learning is shaped by prior experience, agency, and self-direction, [^3],[^4] and these ideas, while not without their critics, continue to influence PD. For educators, there is an added complexity: they are experts in teaching children (pedagogy) while also participating as adult learners (andragogy).[^5] Effective PD should therefore recognise their expertise and autonomy, while also modelling approaches they can use with students. Self-directed learning has limits too, as educators’ PD choices must align with school priorities.[^1]

## The specific nature of PD for computing educators

PD is particularly important for computing educators, who have specific characteristics and needs, which differ from those in other subject areas. For example:

• They may not have a subject specialism in computing, unlike educators in most other subjects. This creates an additional challenge, as significant subject knowledge development needs to take place alongside the development of computing-specific pedagogical content knowledge (PCK).[^6]

• Educators who teach computing need to develop a body of subject knowledge7 and stay updated on changes within the subject.

• Teaching responsibilities for computing educators vary. In settings where computing is a standalone subject, educators may only teach computing. For others, it is one subject among
many (often maths or science). In other settings, computing is integrated into the teaching of other subjects.

• To teach computing effectively, computing educators may need access to sufficient physical resources, such as digital devices or internet access. Their ability to trial new approaches learned in PD may be limited by their access to such resources.[^8]

• Computing educators may be more proficient and positive about using digital resources to access PD, although this is not always the case. This creates an opportunity for greater collaborative learning beyond their immediate setting.

## Principles for designing effective PD for computing educators

Drawing on academic research and the Foundation’s expertise in computing PD, we have identified several key principles that underpin effective PD for computing educators.
Effective PD is learner-focused and designed with research informed expertise:

• Focus on educator and learner outcomes: All PD must equip educators with the skills, knowledge, and confidence to teach computing effectively and to reflect on, and make real, the changes needed in their practice.[^5],[^7]

• Evidence based: PD needs to be based on research and evidence, and should ensure that educators can transfer this research and evidence into real-world practice.

• Developed by experts, for experts: PD should be designed and facilitated by experts in computing education. It should recognise that educators are experts themselves, inviting
them to share learning with each other, critique approaches, and select what will work best for their learners.[^5]

Effective PD is sustained, relevant, and actionable:

• Sustained, personalised journeys: When educators can select their own PD focus and pathway,
greater outcomes follow for students.[^1],[^7]

• Embeds learning into practice: Effective PD makes clear how abstract theory can be turned into concrete practice, by creating opportunities for educators to test, rehearse, adapt, and reflect on new approaches.

• Embodies good learning: Effective PD should model effective pedagogy and andragogy, allowing educators to both understand and experience high-quality learning.[^3], [^5]

Effective PD is contextual, adaptable, and collaborative:

• Adaptable to context: PD is only effective if it can be implemented within an educator’s practice, in their setting. Effective PD design explicitly creates opportunities for educators to evaluate approaches to find concrete ways to implement them.

• Creates collaborative learning opportunities: Effective PD allows educators to experiment with new thinking or approaches in a low-stakes environment while benefitting from the perspectives and experiences of other educators.[^5]

### Understanding these principles allows people who design or select PD to:

• Choose training providers or courses that offer effective professional development

• Create conditions where educators can take ownership of their PD, choosing areas to focus on that also support their setting

• Enable collaboration and shared learning time, including using digital platforms to create PD opportunities for small teams or individual educators

• Support adaptation to local contexts and low-stakes rehearsal before classroom implementation

The Foundation continues to research this topic and we use these concepts in PD courses we provide for educators.

### References

[^1]: Sims, S., Fletcher-Wood, H., O’Mara-Eves, A., Cottingham, S., Stansfield, C., Van Herwegen, J. & Anders, J. (2021). What are the characteristics of teacher professional development that increase pupil achievement? A systematic review and meta-analysis. the-cc.io/qr30_1
[^2]: Fletcher-Wood, H. & Zuccollo, J. (2020). The effects of high-quality professional development on teachers and students: A rapid review and meta-analysis. the-cc.io/qr30_2
[^3]: Knowles, M.S. (1975). Self-directed learning: A guide for learners and teachers. Association Press.
[^4]: Caffarella, R.S. (1993). Self-directed learning. New Directions for Adult and Continuing Education, 57, pp. 25–35.
[^5]: Darling-Hammond, L., Hyler, M.E. & Gardner, M. (2017). Effective teacher professional development. the-cc.io/qr30_5
[^6]: Shulman, L.S. (1986). Those who understand: Knowledge growth in teaching. the-cc.io/qr30_6.
[^7]: Espinal, A., Vieira, C. & Magana, A.J. (2024). Professional development in computational thinking: A systematic literature review. the-cc.io/qr30_7
[^8]: Sentance, S., Humphreys, S. & Dorling, M. (2014). The network of teaching excellence in computer science and master teachers. the-cc.io/qr30_8

